## Introduction

Correlation is not causation.
As simple as this widely agreed-upon statement may seem, scientifically defining causality and using it to drive our modern biomedical research is immensely challenging.
Since being described by Aristotle approximately 2500 years ago [@isbn:9781330267608], causal reasoning (CR) remained virtually unchanged until it experienced significant formal and mathematical advancements [@doi:10.1017/CBO9780511803161; @doi:10.1080/01621459.1996.10476902; @isbn:9781400880874] and a resurgence in the field of machine learning (ML) [@doi:​​10.48550/arxiv.2206.15475] only in recent times.
In parallel, biomedicine has made major leaps in the past century, in particular in the development of high-throughput and large-scale methods.

In the field of systems biology, however, great hopes of causal insights from large-scale omics studies have largely been thwarted by the great complexity of molecular mechanisms and the inability of existing methods to distinguish between correlation and causation [@doi:10.1038/nature09534;@doi:10.48550/arXiv.2312.00818].

Randomised clinical trials show that, in a lower-dimensional context, we can reliably identify causal effects.
By controlling “all” relevant covariates in a trial (via the principle of the gold-standard, randomised, double-blind, and placebo-controlled trial) we isolate the causal effect of the controlled variable, i.e., the treatment.
In the vernacular of Pearl’s Do-Calculus [@doi:10.48550/arXiv.1210.4852], we measure the outcome of, for instance, *do(“Treat with Vemurafenib”)* when conducting a clinical trial on V600E-positive melanoma [@doi:10.1056/NEJMoa1103782].
However, translating this mode of reasoning into the high-dimensional space of modern omics is met with enormous challenges.
The dramatically larger parameter space of models at the molecular level leads to problems in the performance of methods and the identifiability of results, as well as in model explainability.

With this perspective, we discuss the current connections between CR and molecular systems biology.
We will elaborate on three main points:

- biases and what they mean for CR, particularly in the context of biomedical data

- the role of prior knowledge in CR and how to translate prior knowledge into suitable biases

- the role of foundation models in molecular systems biology and their relationship to CR