## Background

### Causal discovery and inference

The field of CR distinguishes between causal discovery - the process of building causal hypotheses from data - and causal inference - the process of predicting specific outcomes given data and the causal relationships known about the system *a priori*.

Causal discovery is more expensive than inference both computationally and data-wise, because it involves distinguishing between correlation and causation and extracting generalisable relationships from the data [@doi:10.1146/annurev-statistics-031017-100630;@doi:10.1007/s10208-022-09581-9].
For modern systems biology, this means that methods for causal discovery typically require large amounts of experiments.
Highly parameterised models such as neural networks increase this requirement even further.
As such, many regard causal discovery in molecular biomedicine as a [scaling problem][Scaling hypothesis] [@doi:10.48550/arXiv.2206.10591;@{https://gwern.net/scaling-hypothesis}].

Causal inference, in contrast, focuses on quantifying the causal effects of one variable on another within the framework of already hypothesised causal relationships.
This approach leverages PK about the assumed causal links, which in the causal field are often encoded using directed graphs.
Most inference mechanisms perform better when including PK at some point in the process, as has been observed in biomedical research [@doi:10.1038/nmeth.3773].
This allows researchers to represent both the causal connections between variables and their directionality, which is required to understand how changes in one variable might lead to changes in another.
For instance, in the case of the RAF-MEK-ERK signalling pathway, a graph would depict RAF activation leading to MEK activation, which in turn leads to ERK activation.
This clear representation of directionality is important for causal inference, as it ensures that analyses focus on the effect of upstream changes on downstream outcomes.
For example, in analysing phosphoproteomic data to assess the impact of inhibiting RAF, a graph-based approach would guide researchers to correctly attribute subsequent changes in ERK to this specific intervention.
Without this causal framework, one might mistakenly interpret correlations as bidirectional influences or overlook confounding factors, leading to incorrect conclusions.
However, inference is also very sensitive to the completeness of the PK that is applied; most biomedical PK is far from complete [@doi:10.15252/msb.202211036].
For instance, the function of more than 95% of all the known phosphorylation events that occur in human cells is currently unknown [@doi:10.1126/scisignal.aau8645;@doi:10.1038/s41587-019-0344-3].
In contrast to causal discovery, scaling therefore plays a smaller role in causal inference; here, the main problems are incompleteness and identifying the “right” [biases][Bias (machine learning)] to apply.

### The ladder of causality

Orthogonally to the distinction between causal discovery and inference, we can also distinguish between different levels of causality.
Pearl’s ladder of causality roughly distinguishes three types of CR in increasing order of power: observation, intervention, and counterfactuals [@isbn:9780465097609].
While the inferences we wish to make in biomedical research are often of the counterfactual type (e.g., “would RAF inhibition lead to decrease in ERK activation if the media contained Epidermal Growth Factors?”), the data we have available is typically observational (e.g., “the levels of RAF and MEK activity are correlated”) and sometimes interventional (e.g., “targeting RAF with CRISPR leads to a decrease in ERK activity”).
To generate interventional or even counterfactual inferences from observational data is a major challenge, if not impossible, depending on the characteristics of the system under study [@doi:10.1214/09-SS057].

There are approaches to delineate interventional inference from observational data, such as the ‘natural experiments’ framework [@doi:10.1080/01621459.1996.10476902;@isbn:9781400880874].
However, these approaches are by their nature even more data-hungry than when using interventional data, as they often do not use the full breadth of the dataset [@doi:10.1016/j.jeconom.2007.05.001].
Therefore, in biomedical research, there has been a push towards generating large-scale interventional data, for instance through the use of CRISPR/Cas9 screens with single-cell resolution [@doi:10.1016/j.cell.2016.11.038].
Current developments of CR in the biomedical field thus mostly focus on these types of data.

### Deduction and induction

Lastly, in CR, we can also distinguish between [deductive and inductive reasoning][Deductive vs. Inductive Reasoning].
Deductive reasoning is the process of deriving a conclusion from a set of fixed and known premises.
“All men are mortal, Socrates is a man, therefore Socrates is mortal” is a classic example of deductive reasoning.
In biomedical research, this is typically the process of deriving a conclusion from a set of PK.
For instance, having PK of the linear activation cascade EGFR->RAS->RAF->MEK->ERK->Growth, and that Vemurafenib will inhibit RAF activity, allows us to deduce that giving Vemurafenib will inhibit growth of cancer cells [@doi:10.1056/NEJMoa1103782].

Inductive reasoning, on the other hand, involves making generalisations from specific observations.
Testing the hypothesis above, we apply Vemurafenib in a clinical trial of V600E-positive melanoma and find that it is clinically efficacious [@doi:10.1056/NEJMoa1103782].
Commonly, we then use induction to infer from this limited cohort that the treatment may be effective in the entire population.
We could further infer that Vemurafenib may be an effective remedy in other V600E-positive cancers as well, or that inhibiting this cascade may be a general mechanism of action of anti-cancer agents in cancers that display MAPK pathway overactivation [@doi:10.1038/nrd3847].
In the molecular realm, we could further infer that the inhibition of other components of the cascade, such as EGFR or MEK, may also be promising target leads [@doi:10.3390/ijms20061483].

The main difference between deduction and induction is that the former is logically complete - i.e., if the premises are true and the argument is valid, the conclusion must also be true.
However, deduction is also more limited in scope than induction.
In biomedical research, we often have to rely on inductive reasoning because we cannot feasibly test all hypotheses in a deductive manner.
In consequence, the *inductive biases* we introduce into our models (i.e., those mechanisms in the model that help with inductive reasoning) are a pivotal part of performing CR in biomedical research.
